### Modeling Risk factors of Hospitalization due to *Staphylococcus aureus* Infection in Fulton County, Georgia, 2017 using a Random-Effect Logistic Regression Model
Author: JC<br>

**Abstract**

**Objective** – The aim of this paper is to predict a correlated binary outcome, hospitalization, among patients diagnosed with *Staphylococcus aureus* infection at various hospitals in the metro-Atlanta region of the United States in 2017 through random-effects modeling. Patient factors include age, blood stream infections, dialysis treatment, diabetes status, smoking status, methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* (MRSA)-specific infection, and wounds at the time of infection, stratified by community-onset and healthcare-associated infection.<br><br>
**Methods** – The Georgia Emerging Infections Program conducted a surveillance study in Fulton County, Georgia. A cohort of patients with *S. aureus* infection was surveyed from 19 acute care hospitals, 1 pediatric hospital, and 2 referral laboratories in 2017. The primary outcome was hospitalization following *S. aureus* infection. We applied weights on non-invasive infections (1:4) and invasive infections (1:1) to account for unequal sampling probabilities. Risk factor variables were selected a priori according to medical literature to date. A baseline weighted logistic regression model was applied to predict the likelihood of hospitalization following infection based on age, bloodstream infection, dialysis, diabetes, smoking, MRSA, and wounds at the time of infection. In addition, we specified other models: 1) a weighted logistic regression model stratified by community-onset and healthcare-associated setting 2) a weighted logistic regression model with random intercepts clustered at the hospital level 3) a weighted logistic regression model with random-intercepts clustered at the hospital level and stratified by community-onset and healthcare-associated setting. All tests were performed at a two-sided significance level of 0.05. We evaluated the predictive performance and fit of these models based on the AUC-ROC (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve) and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). In addition, we examined the random-effect variance estimate to assess if accounting for intra-class correlation within hospitals was necessary in the final model. Weighted descriptive tables were produced using R software (Version 4.4.1). Exploratory data analysis and statistical modeling were performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).<br><br>
**Results** – In the baseline weighted logistic regression model, all risk factors, including age, bloodstream infection, dialysis, diabetes, smoking, MRSA, and wound, were positively associated with hospitalization. The stratified, community-onset model showed that all risk factors, except age and dialysis, were positively associated with hospitalization, whereas the healthcare-associated model showed that all risk factors, except age and wound were positively associated with hospitalization. The odds of hospitalization due to septicemia were 99 times that without septicemia in community-onset infections, while the odds of hospitalization from septicemia were 10 times that without septicemia in healthcare-associated infections, adjusting for other risk factors. The weighted logistic regression model with random intercepts clustered at the hospital level showed that only age, bloodstream infection, dialysis, diabetes, and wound were significant risk factors of hospitalization, whereas smoking status and MRSA were not. The weighted logistic stratified model for community-onset infections, accounting for hospital-level clustering, showed that age, diabetes, dialysis, and septicemia, were positively associated with hospitalization, whereas for healthcare-associated infections, only septicemia was positively associated with hospitalization, controlling for the other risk factors. The stratified, weighted random-effect logistic model had the highest AUC-ROC score (0.956) for predicting hospitalization of a patient in Fulton County, Georgia compared to the other models. The model fit metric based on BIC for the baseline weighted logistic model and the weighted, random-intercept logistic model were, respectively, 4185.2 and 2758.1. Additionally, the weighted, random-intercept logistic model stratified as community-onset infection showed that the random-intercept variance differed significantly between hospitals (p = 0.035), in contrast to when stratified to that of hospital-associated infections (p=0.089). Hospital IDs, GA040, GA065, GAMDO, had significantly decreased odds of hospitalization compared to other hospitals, while GA011, GA026, GA004, GA027, GA009, GA032, and GA015 had significantly increased odds of hospitalization compared to other hospitals.<br><br>
**Conclusion** – Septicemia was a leading factor of hospitalization in all cases of *S.aureus* infection, after controlling for age, dialysis treatment, diabetes status, smoking status, MRSA, and wounds at the time of infection. The model with the highest discriminatory power for classification was a weighted random-effect logistic model, stratified by community-onset and healthcare-associated infection. Accounting for the random variance between hospitals and applying stratification by community and hospital setting were effective means of controlling the Type I error rate; the standard errors of the weighted random effect, stratified logistic model were wide enough to account for this variability. As a result, the final model represents less biased results for predicting risk factors of hospitalization compared to the baseline weighted logistic model. This paper predicts risk factors of hospitalization among patients with *S. aureus* infection in the metro-Atlanta region in 2017 to understand populations at risk and identify factors that can mitigate hospital burden.<br>


MSSA = methicillin-susceptible *Staphylococcus aureus*<br>
MRSA = methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*
